# ALVIE tool

This is the source code of the ALVIE tool, accompanying the paper:

> ["Bridging the Gap: Automated Analysis of Sancus"](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/10664425) by Matteo Busi, Riccardo Focardi, and Flaminia Luccio ([arXiv version](https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.09518))


The project was inspired by the paper

> ["Mind the Gap: Studying the Insecurity of Provably Secure Embedded Trusted Execution Architectures"](https://mici.hu/papers/bognar22gap.pdf) by Marton Bognar, Jo Van Bulck, and Frank Piessens

and aims to reproduce their results automatically and to discover new attacks/anomalies in the Sancus processor.

# Structure of the project

The project is structured as follows:
* `alvie` contains the source code of the project, in particular:
    + `alvie/code` contains the OCaml sources
* `spec-lib` includes the specifications we used for learning
    + `example` are the specs for the example of Sec. 3
* `results` includes the models generated by the learning, following the naming from [Bognar et. al](https://mici.hu/papers/bognar22gap.pdf) and our paper (pdf renderings are in the subfolder `pdf`)
* `counterexamples` includes the witness graphs (pdf renderings are in the subfolder `pdf`)
* `Dockerfile` is the docker file for the project
* `*.sh` files are useful to reproduce our results (see below)

# Notes on the specifications

* To improve the performance, for each attack in Table 1 we provide a specification that uses a strict subset of the capabilities of the advanced attacker A+ (Figure 9).

* The enclave specification is kept equal to that in the paper except for the secret comparison instruction, which is performed between `?` (`s` in the paper) and `r4` (`#0` in the paper). This is equivalent for our purposes.

# Installation & Setup

## Option 1: Docker (Recommended)

Docker is the easiest and most reliable way to run ALVIE. Pre-built images are available for both `amd64` and `arm64` architectures.

### Quick Start: Pull from Docker Hub

```bash
docker pull matteobusi/alvie
docker run --rm -it matteobusi/alvie
```

Once the container is ready, you can run any ALVIE command:

```bash
cd /home/alvie
./learn_one.sh d54f031 b6    # Learn B6 model
./check_one.sh b6            # Check B6 model
```

### Build Docker Image Locally

To build the Docker image for your current platform:

```bash
docker build -t alvie .
docker run --rm -it alvie
```

For multi-platform builds (requires buildx):
```bash
docker buildx build --platform linux/amd64,linux/arm64 -t alvie:latest .
```

## Option 2: Manual Setup (Ubuntu 22.04 / 24.04)

For Ubuntu users, you can run ALVIE directly on your system by installing all dependencies manually.

### Ubuntu 22.04 LTS

All packages are available in the default repositories:

```bash
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install -y \
    build-essential cmake git python3 python3-pip \
    binutils-msp430 gcc-msp430 msp430-libc msp430mcu \
    iverilog tk expect-dev autoconf flex bison pkg-config \
    libffi-dev python3-dev wget libboost-dev opam

# Install mCRL2
sudo add-apt-repository -y ppa:mcrl2/release-ppa
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install -y mcrl2

# Build and install Verilator v5.002
git clone https://github.com/verilator/verilator /tmp/verilator
cd /tmp/verilator
git checkout v5.002
autoconf && ./configure && make -j $(nproc) && sudo make install
cd - && rm -rf /tmp/verilator

# Setup OCaml
opam init --disable-sandboxing -y
eval "$(opam env)"
opam switch create 4.13.1 -y
eval "$(opam env)"
opam install -y dune py core alcotest angstrom core_kernel core_unix logs fmt ocamlgraph shexp ppx_deriving qcheck

# Build ALVIE
cd alvie/code && dune build && cd ../..

# Clone Sancus core
git clone https://github.com/martonbognar/sancus-core-gap
```

### Ubuntu 24.04 LTS

Ubuntu 24.04 doesn't have the MSP430 toolchain in the default repositories. Add the Ubuntu 22.04 (Jammy) repository first:

```bash
# Add Jammy repository
echo "deb http://archive.ubuntu.com/ubuntu jammy universe" | sudo tee /etc/apt/sources.list.d/jammy-universe.sources.list

# Then follow the same steps as Ubuntu 22.04 above
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install -y \
    build-essential cmake git python3 python3-pip \
    binutils-msp430 gcc-msp430 msp430-libc msp430mcu \
    iverilog tk expect-dev autoconf flex bison pkg-config \
    libffi-dev python3-dev wget libboost-dev opam
# ... rest of setup (mCRL2, Verilator, OCaml, ALVIE build)
```

**Note:** You can remove the Jammy repository later if desired:
```bash
sudo rm /etc/apt/sources.list.d/jammy-universe.sources.list
sudo apt-get update
```

# Running the found attacks

Once the container is ready, you can run the following command to check that the attacks reported in the paper are synthesized correctly and actually break the security of the relevant Sancus versions (the full test requires a few minutes):
```
$ cd alvie/code; dune exec tt_attack
```

# Reproducing our experiments

There are a few options to reproduce the experiments we did.

## Learning and checking the running example only

This task takes a few seconds on our server.
To reproduce, `cd` to the folder where this `README.md`.
Afterwards, remove existing results:
```
$ rm -Rf results/example counterexamples/example
```
and then run
```
$ ./learn_example.sh
```
to learn the models corresponding to the example in the paper (you can find the models in `results/example`).
Once done, run
```
$ ./check_example.sh
```
to produce the witness graph for the example.
You can find it in the `counterexamples/example` directory.

## Learning and checking for an experiment of choice

This task is longer that the one above and takes between one hour and a couple of days on our server, depending on the experiment.

Assume that you want to run experiments for `attack-name` which was fixed in `patch-commit` in the `sancus-core-gap` repo by Bognar et al. (see table below for names and commits).
Simply, `cd` to the folder where this `README` is and then run
```
rm -Rf results/*attack-name*.dot counterexamples/*attack-name*/*.dot
```
to delete the existing models and witness graphs, then launch the learning with
```
$ ./learn_one.sh patch-commit attack-name
```
Once the learning is done (results in `results` folder), just run
```
$ ./check_one.sh attack-name
```
to produce the witness graph for `attack-name`.
You can find it in the `counterexamples` directory.

|                       |           |
|---------------------	|---------	|
| **Original commit** 	| ef753b6 	|
| **Patch B2**        	| 3170d5d 	|
| **Patch B3**        	| 6475709 	|
| **Patch B6**        	| d54f031 	|
| **Patch B4**        	| 3636536 	|
| **Patch B1**        	| e8cf011 	|
| **Patch B7(1)**     	| 264f135 	|
| **Final commit**    	| bf89c0b 	|
| **Patch B8**     	    | no fix 	|
| **Patch B9**       	| no fix 	|


In our experience one of the fastest single experiment to run is **B6**, i.e.,
```
$ rm -Rf results/*-b6-*.dot counterexamples/b6/*.dot
$ ./learn_one.sh d54f031 b6
$ ./check_one.sh b6
```

If you want to test on one of the new attacks (i.e., **B8** or **B9**) use the following command for learning (command for the checking phase is identical!):
```
$ ./learn_one_nospecial.sh attack-name
```

## Learning and checking all the experiments

If you have many cores running all the experiments takes roughly as much as it takes to run a single one.
Simply, `cd` to the folder where this `README` is, delete existing models and witness graphs using:
```
rm -Rf results/*.dot counterexamples/*/*.dot
```
and then run:
```
$ ./learn_all.sh
```
to learn all the models in the paper.

Once the learning is done (results in `results` folder), just run
```
$ ./check_all.sh
```
to produce the witness graphs.
You can find them in the `counterexamples` directory.

## Visualizing Graphviz dot files

All the above scripts will produce files in the [Graphviz format](https://graphviz.org/).
To view them you can either use a visualizer (e.g., `KGraphViewer` or `xdot`) or export them directly to PDF using:
```
$ dot -Tpdf file.dot -o file.pdf
```
